AROMATIC n.- a fragrant ingredient (herb, plant or root) used to introduce a flavor and aroma to an idgredient or dish

AERATE v .- to whisk vigorously, incorporating
air to lighten a mixture.

BIND v. - to give body and gloss to a sauce or
a soup, essentially by adding the yolk of an egg.

BLANCH v. - to undertake the first stage
of cooking vegetables or meat in boiling or
simmering water, starting either from hot or cold.
Blanching helps to tenderize the food and fix the
colour.

BEURRE MANIÉ n. m. - butter that has
been softened by hand and mixed with flour; it is
used to thicken a sauce that is too liquid.


BOUQUET GARNI n. m. - a small bundle
consisting of thyme, bay leaves, sprigs of parsley
and celery sticks, wrapped in a green leek leaf or
piece of muslin and tied with string. A thin slice of
belly pork is also sometimes included. The bundle
is added during cooking to increase the flavour of
a dish.

BROWN v .- to cook ingredients or a dish very
gently until attractively golden on the surface.

BRUNOISE n. f. - vegetables, usually firm-
textured, that have been very precisely chopped
into 2-3 mm (1/8 inch) dice.

CARAMELIZE v .- 1. to prolong the cooking
of meat juices in order to obtain a flavour that
is as intense as possible; 2. to heat sugar until it becomes a golden brown liquid.

CHILL v. - to cool a hot liquid or solid quickly
to a low temperature.

CHINOIS n. m. - a fine-mesh conical strainer
through which a mixture is passed to remove any
large elements and ensure a smooth consistency.

CLARIFIED BUTTER n. - butter that has
been melted over a very low heat or in a bain-
marie to separate its impurities, which either sink
or rise. The resulting butter is skimmed, then
carefully ladled into a container (to avoid the
impurities that have sunk to the bottom of the pan).

CLARIFY v. - 1. to separate the impurities
from butter to make it purer, more delicate and
easier to digest; 2. to add egg whites to a jus or a
stock in order to make it clear.

DEGLAZE v .- to dissolve the crusty cooking
residue left in the bottom of a pan by adding
water, wine or stock.

DEGRAISSER v. - a French term meaning
to remove excess fat from an ingredient, liquid or
a dish.

DEMI-GLACE n. m. - a rich, glossy brown,
reduced sauce, typically flavoured with wine.

DISCARD v. - to throw away any element
or ingredient no longer required, or any inedible
waste.

DUXELLES n. - a mixture of mushrooms cut
into very fine dice and flavoured with aromatic
herbs; an excellent base for making stuffings.

FILTER v. - to purify a more or less liquid mix-
ture by passing it through a chinois or fine sieve.

FINE HERBES n. f. - a classic French blend
of fresh herbs, usually including parsley, tarragon,
chervil and chives; used to flavour egg, dairy and
seafood dishes.

FLAMBER v .- a French term meaning to pour
alcohol over food and ignite it; this is often done
at the table to create a spectacle for the diners
while enhancing the flavour of the dish.

FUMET n. - very full-bodied cooking juices
made exclusively from fish and game.

GIBLETS n. - the specific name for poultry
offal: liver, gizzard, heart, feet, comb, etc.

GLAZE v .- to cook vegetables in a little water
with butter and sugar to give them a shiny surface.
Vegetables glazed à brun are cooked until slightly
caramelized to achieve a darker surface coloration;
those cooked à blanc are not caramelized at all.

INCORPORATE v. - to mix, introduce or
blend an ingredient into a mixture.

INFUSE v. - to release flavours into a liquid
(ideally just boiled) by allowing aromatic ingre-
dients to steep in it.

INGREDIENTS n. - the items required for
making a recipe, usually specified in exact amounts
for a certain number of servings.

INTENSIFY v .- to boost the flavour of a dish
by reducing it over heat, or by adding aromatic
ingredients that act as flavour enhancers.

JELLIFY v. - to add gelatine or agar-agar to
give a softer texture to certain mixtures that have
a tendency to go hard at room temperature or
when chilled.

JUICES n. - the liquid that is released during
the cooking of meat, poultry and certain vege-
tables. These juices are precious because they
contain the very essence of the item's flavours
and aromas.

JULIENNE n. and v. - vegetables cut into
very thin sticks.

LARD v .- to thread thin strips of bacon or ham
through certain kinds of meat or fish to give them
more flavour and succulence.

LET DOWN v .- to add a liquid to a stock or a
sauce to make it runnier.

MONTER AU BEURRE v .- to finish with
butter; this is usually done to sauces by whisking
in small amounts of cold butter to make them
smoother.

MUSLIN n. - a piece of fine cloth (also known
as cheesecloth) through which liquids such as
sauces and stocks are filtered and strained.

NAP v .- to coat food evenly with a sauce.

PEPPER n. - small dried berries available as
black, white or pink peppercorns; they should
be freshly ground from a pepper mill or freshly
cracked using a mortar and pestle.

POIVRE MIGNONETTE n. - the French
term for freshly cracked peppercorns.

REDUCE v .- to boil off water or other liquid,
often from a sauce, in order to concentrate the
flavour and aromas.

ROUX n. m. - a mixture of flour cooked in
fat, which forms the base for a great number of
cooked sauces.

SEASON v. - to add condiments (usually salt
and pepper) to a dish to bring out its flavour and
aromas.

SEPARATE v. - to divide the white of a raw
egg from the yolk as you remove it from the shell.

SHRED v .- to cut vegetables, such as cabbage,
into fine strips.

SIMMER v .- to cook very gently in liquid that
is on the point of boiling; the surface will appear to be trembling.

SKIM v. - to remove the fat or foam that rises
to the surface of a liquid during cooking; a skim-
mer or a ladle may be used for doing this.

SKIN v. - to immerse certain vegetables or fruit
such as tomatoes in boiling water for a moment
in order to remove the very thin outer covering.

SLICE v. - to cut meat, vegetables or fruit into
thin, flat pieces of the same size.

STOCK n. - a flavoured liquid made by gently
heating water, bones and vegetables; it forms the
basis of many sauces and soups.

STRAIN v .- to pass a liquid mixture through a
chinois in order to separate out any solid matter.

STRIP v .- to separate the leaves of plants and
herbs from their stalks.

STUD v. - to push one ingredient into ano-
ther, such as cloves into an onion.

SWEAT v. - 1. to heat chopped vegetables
very slowly without fat or water in a covered pan
so that they release their own liquid; 2. to cook
meat and vegetables over a low heat with a little
fat in a covered container to concentrate the
flavours.

TRIM v. - 1. to cut off the unwanted or ine-
dible parts of vegetables and fruit, e.g. leaves,
stalks, pips, to improve their appearance; 2. to
remove excess fat from a piece of meat; 3. to cut
off the small fins of fish using scissors.

WHISK v .- to mix or blend vigorously using a
balloon whisk so that the mixture will aerate or
become creamy.


ZEST n. and v. - 1. the coloured outer layer of
citrus fruit; 2. to peel off the thin outer layer of citrus fruit using a zesting tool or a chef's knife.









